README.md, before:

# FOCAL65_KIM1
FOCAL-65 for KIM-1 computers based on the source of the Aresco version (V3D) for TIM

Source code typed in from a scanned listing of a 1977 printout and
verified against a binary version saved by Hans Otten.  The goal is to
get source code that assembles to a byte-exact version of the
historical binary.  Hans has also typed in this code to recreate the
original assembly for both a KIM-1 and TIM version, and you can find
his sources here: http://retro.hansotten.nl/6502-sbc/focal-65-v3d/
along with some history.

Hans Otten also has an excellent simulator for the KIM-1 here:
http://retro.hansotten.nl/6502-sbc/kim-1-manuals-and-software/kim-1-simulator/
This software should run on the KIM-1 Simulator software but needs
special FOCAL V3D break handline turned on in the settings.

This is a separate effort from Hans Otten's work to recreate this code
from the scanned listing.  This code has been formatted for the
Kowalski assembler, but should assemble with other assemblers with
only minor formatting or assembler directive changes.

# Current Status:

The source assembles and is a binary match to the historical
version provided by Hans Otten with the exception of extra bytes
at the end of zero page and at the end of the program.

This version appears to work in the KIM1 simulator (lightly tested).

I tried adding the zero page initialization routine from the FOCAL
6502 User Notes, but FOCAL does not run properly so that has been
removed in this version.  There appear to be some addresses that are
hard coded that need to be adjusted above an beyond the zero page
values listed in the FOCAL 6502 User Notes.  The code for this patch
has been placed in zpinit.asm.

# Assembling Notes:
Using v1.3.4.7 from https://sbc.rictor.org/kowalski.html

Simulator (menu) -> Options -> Assembler Tab

Select Generate listing (and give file name) if you want a listing.

Unselect "Generate extra byte" under "Extra byte after BRK instruction"

Assemble (F7)

Assembled code is saved in simulator RAM and needs to be saved to disk.

File (menu) -> Save code

select format at bottom (Files of type: dropdown) and then provide file name

Additional note for using KIM1 simulator - Motorola S-records appear
to get all segments to load into the correct locations with a single
file (Intel hex does not.  Binary dumps the entire 64K memory space
and will overwrite hardware configuration registers for the KIM-1, 
causing failure as well).


# Binary comparison notes:
## Programs used:
Assemble with Kowalski simulator (see above) - it's **very important** to uncheck the
assembler option that generates an extra byte after the BRK instruction.

Save code as "Binary image" to filename FOCALNEW.bin

Convert8bitHexFormat (v2.7 by Hans Otten - had to install some Ubuntu dependencies)

http://retro.hansotten.nl/6502-sbc/kim-1-manuals-and-software/pc-utilities/#converthex

Convert the original PTP (Paper TaPe) file from "MOS papertape" to Binary

Use "FOCAL-65.bin" for filename and you will get FOCAL-650000.bin for zero page data
and FOCAL-652000.bin for program starting at $2000

dhex 0.69 used for binary comparison

http://www.dettus.net/dhex/

## Filenames used:
Original binary from Dave Hassler with some patches applied (I/O and 16K KIM1?):

FOCAL-650000.bin - binary dump of zero page from PTP (papertape) file

FOCAL-652000.bin - binary dump of program (starting at $2000) from PTP file

FOCALNEW.bin - binary image (entire 64K memory space) from Kowalski assembler after assembling FOCAL-65-SOURCE_ARESCOV3D_RAW-WORK_V2.asm 

Cleaner (no patches) original binary from Hans Otten:

FOCALZP.BIN - binary dump of zero page

FOCALM.BIN - binary dump of program (starting at $2000)

## Zero page compare
dhex FOCALNEW.bin FOCALZP.bin

## Program compare
dhex -a2h 2000 -o1h 2000 FOCALNEW.bin FOCALM.bin

Commit message:

Added PTP file along with instructions for creating it.

README.md, after:

# FOCAL65_KIM1
FOCAL-65 for KIM-1 computers based on the source of the Aresco version (V3D) for TIM

Source code typed in from a scanned listing of a 1977 printout and
verified against a binary version saved by Hans Otten.  The goal is to
get source code that assembles to a byte-exact version of the
historical binary.  Hans has also typed in this code to recreate the
original assembly for both a KIM-1 and TIM version, and you can find
his sources here: http://retro.hansotten.nl/6502-sbc/focal-65-v3d/
along with some history.

Hans Otten also has an excellent simulator for the KIM-1 here:
http://retro.hansotten.nl/6502-sbc/kim-1-manuals-and-software/kim-1-simulator/
This software should run on the KIM-1 Simulator software but needs
special FOCAL V3D break handline turned on in the settings.

This is a separate effort from Hans Otten's work to recreate this code
from the scanned listing.  This code has been formatted for the
Kowalski assembler, but should assemble with other assemblers with
only minor formatting or assembler directive changes.

# Current Status:

The source assembles and is a binary match to the historical
version provided by Hans Otten with the exception of extra bytes
at the end of zero page and at the end of the program.

This version appears to work in the KIM1 simulator (lightly tested).

I tried adding the zero page initialization routine from the FOCAL
6502 User Notes, but FOCAL does not run properly so that has been
removed in this version.  There appear to be some addresses that are
hard coded that need to be adjusted above an beyond the zero page
values listed in the FOCAL 6502 User Notes.  The code for this patch
has been placed in zpinit.asm.

# Assembling Notes:
Using v1.3.4.7 from https://sbc.rictor.org/kowalski.html

Simulator (menu) -> Options -> Assembler Tab

Select Generate listing (and give file name) if you want a listing.

Unselect "Generate extra byte" under "Extra byte after BRK instruction"

Assemble (F7)

Assembled code is saved in simulator RAM and needs to be saved to disk.

File (menu) -> Save code

select format at bottom (Files of type: dropdown) and then provide file name

Additional note for using KIM1 simulator - Motorola S-records appear
to get all segments to load into the correct locations with a single
file (Intel hex does not.  Binary dumps the entire 64K memory space
and will overwrite hardware configuration registers for the KIM-1, 
causing failure as well).

To get a PTP file, use the Motorola S-records format when saving from the
Kowalski assembler and then use Hans Otten's Convert8bitFormat program
to convert from S-records to MOS PTP format.

# Binary comparison notes:
## Programs used:
Assemble with Kowalski simulator (see above) - it's **very important** to uncheck the
assembler option that generates an extra byte after the BRK instruction.

Save code as "Binary image" to filename FOCALNEW.bin

Convert8bitHexFormat (v2.7 by Hans Otten - had to install some Ubuntu dependencies)

http://retro.hansotten.nl/6502-sbc/kim-1-manuals-and-software/pc-utilities/#converthex

Convert the original PTP (Paper TaPe) file from "MOS papertape" to Binary

Use "FOCAL-65.bin" for filename and you will get FOCAL-650000.bin for zero page data
and FOCAL-652000.bin for program starting at $2000

dhex 0.69 used for binary comparison

http://www.dettus.net/dhex/

## Filenames used:
Original binary from Dave Hassler with some patches applied (I/O and 16K KIM1?):

FOCAL-650000.bin - binary dump of zero page from PTP (papertape) file

FOCAL-652000.bin - binary dump of program (starting at $2000) from PTP file

FOCALNEW.bin - binary image (entire 64K memory space) from Kowalski assembler after assembling FOCAL-65-SOURCE_ARESCOV3D_RAW-WORK_V2.asm 

Cleaner (no patches) original binary from Hans Otten:

FOCALZP.BIN - binary dump of zero page

FOCALM.BIN - binary dump of program (starting at $2000)

## Zero page compare
dhex FOCALNEW.bin FOCALZP.bin

## Program compare
dhex -a2h 2000 -o1h 2000 FOCALNEW.bin FOCALM.bin
